Sloan Foundation grant aims
===========================

Aim 1: Empower Researchers to Exploit Video Coding by Enabling Datavyu to Synchronize Codes and Metadata with Databrary
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Project 1.1 Add Databrary integration features to Datavyu

Post-hoc curation puts an onerous demand on researchers’ limited time. Despite the convenience of our active curation framework, the need to enter metadata about participants and tasks in multiple places at multiple times is a burden, increases input errors, and decreases the likelihood that datasets will be shared. Preliminary work: Databrary’s spreadsheet and timeline interfaces make it easy for researchers to enter vital metadata about participants and tasks, but users must enter data by hand into separate desktop spreadsheets or coding tools like Datavyu. Because researchers also require these metadata for desktop-centered statistical analyses, the current workflows duplicate effort, increase the likelihood of data entry errors in critical fields like sharing permission, and make data sharing burdensome. To ensure efficient, accurate, automated transfer of vital data and metadata, we will enable researchers to enter participant-, session-, and study-level metadata into Datavyu and have these data elements automatically synchronize with Databrary. Initially, we will support a limited number of standard data elements—sharing permission level, participant birthdate, test date, gender, race, ethnicity, testing location, lab/home setting, and so on. We will add features to Datavyu that allow it to securely connect to a specific Databrary volume during data synchronization, and to make appropriate and secure Databrary API calls that create new sessions or modify existing ones. We will develop and enforce specific file-naming conventions to facilitate the exchange of Datavyu coding files with Databrary. We will set up controls in Databrary to avoid data overwriting, and provide data owners with appropriate notifications about session and volume changes such as file uploads and modifications. Data entry of session- and participant-level information, especially data sharing permissions, will be substantially more accurate and error-free by improving integration and interoperability between Datavyu and Databrary. This project also lays the foundation for future API enhancements that will allow users to collect participant metadata electronically (using web- or tablet-based apps or their own spreadsheets) and synchronize it with Databrary.

Aim 2: Build Visualization and Documentation Features into Databrary that Transform It from a Passive Repository to an Active Tool for Discovery
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Project 2.1: Import and export Datavyu and CHAT coding files

Codes and transcripts could provide a valuable foundation for new discovery if the codes were easily visualized alongside the videos they annotate. By upgrading Databrary to store Datavyu codes internally, researchers will be able to view, build on, and extend each other's codes. Preliminary work: Databrary currently stores Datavyu files linked with the videos in a session, but the codes cannot be visualized or manipulated. Databrary already supports simple temporal tagging of video segments. We will extend Databrary's data model for tags to include Datavyu codes. This will make Databrary capable of importing codes contained in Datavyu coding files, speed the accumulation of knowledge about behaviors captured in video, make video data reuse more attractive to researchers, and enhance the value of sharing videos and codes with the Databrary community. In parallel with the backend work needed to import Datavyu codes, we will implement the ability to represent speech transcripts in the CHAT format.

### Project 2.2: Deploy user interfaces for visualizing and manipulating coding passes

Improvements to Databrary's interface will make it easier for users to visualize what codes have been applied and by which researchers, to explore these codes in conjunction with the videos, to access and export the codes, and to upload new coding passes to their own sessions. After users select a video of interest, Databrary will enable researchers to visualize and manipulate existing coding passes linked with that video so that users can preview the codes, select a subset of passes to export in their preferred format, and upload updated versions. Preliminary work: Databrary's timeline viewer allows users to visualize temporal relations among multiple phases of a data collection (e.g., parallel data streams or multiple camera views). Using a browser, users manually select segments of video and enter codes. We will augment this interface to allow users to visualize different coding passes applied to a particular session.

Interface enhancements will allow users to select or deselect specific coding passes for display and further manipulation. The system will support selective exporting of coding passes along with the associated videos. The existing upload and download functionality on Databrary's timeline session viewer will be expanded to allow more flexible manipulation of coding passes. Users will be able to upload a new coding pass or replace an existing coding pass on sessions they can edit from any coding file on their computer through an enhanced Ruby API and new Python and R APIs. After selecting coding passes of interest, users will be able to export those passes in a single Datavyu or CHAT file or in a CSV format that can be imported into statistical analysis software. Projects 2.1 and 2.2 will lay the groundwork for future enhancements that will allow Databrary to import, visualize, and export coding files created by other video-coding tools \[35–38\] or from custom software used by computer vision and language researchers so as to add machine-generated tags to Databrary’s recordings.

### Project 2.3: Add video-centered electronic protocols and coding manuals to Databrary and make these code definitions available to Datavyu

Detailed protocol and coding manuals are essential components of transparent, reproducible behavioral research. The manuals make concrete critical details about procedures and code definitions. Developmental researchers typically create coding manuals that define the behavioral codes associated with a set of analyses, using word processing and spreadsheet software, but these formats preclude widespread sharing. Text-based code definitions and protocol descriptions become significantly more informative when the definitions are linked to illustrative video excerpts and can be readily shared alongside the videos.

The wiki-based format offers many advantages, including flexibility—it supports text, images, and video—and components such as code definitions or procedure descriptions can be linked to specific URLs. These URLs can, in turn, be linked to specific codes or coding passes. If the video clips are stored on Databrary, only authorized users who are signed into the system can view the clips. This protects participants’ identities, and makes it more attractive for researchers to add video clips to illustrate procedures or code definitions.

Project 2.3 adds electronic code manual and protocol manual capabilities to Databrary and makes it possible to link manuals to Datavyu files. These capabilities will enable users who are viewing a coded video on Databrary or coding a video in Datavyu to click on a code and read its definition from a coding manual associated with the study. In turn, users viewing procedures and codes will be able to read the text-based description of the procedure or code and then watch a linked video clip (stored on Databrary) demonstrating how it is carried out in practice. These features will require both backend and user interface enhancements to Databrary and modifications to the Datavyu code base. We will consult with our Advisory Board and other experts about whether to adapt an existing wiki engine and interface for our use, link to an existing resource (e.g., OSF), or build its equivalent within Databrary. With these proposed enhancements, researchers will be able to view code definitions across shared datasets to evaluate their clarity and consistency. Researchers will be able to initiate conversations about opportunities to achieve consensus around conceptual ontologies in areas where there is currently no consensus. Moreover, all code and protocol definitions will be indexed by the Databrary search engine, and thus become searchable metadata for other researchers.

### Project 2.4: Making Databrary’s infrastructure scalable and robust

Databrary has shown exponential growth, its user base more than doubling in the last year. The single-server system works well and has minimal downtime. But if the current growth of users continues, proposed large-scale video-based research studies go forward, and the features we propose prove attractive, the technical infrastructure of the system will need to be operationalized as a more robust service. We must ensure that researchers using Databrary suffer no data losses or system outages. Relying on Millman’s expertise and working with NYU's Central IT staff, we will redesign the system architecture to include both data and application redundancies to include high availability, load balancing, and disaster recovery for both the application and data.
